Hello, and welcome to session 113,
Full Screen and Aqua Changes.
My name is Troy Stephens.
I'm a software engineer
on the AppKit team,
and we have a variety of
interesting topics for you today.
They are all about interface,
all about interface changes
in Mac OS X 10.7 Lion.
First up,
if you're eager to learn about Lion's new
Full Screen mode and how you can enable
your own applications to participate
in this powerful new system feature,
you are in the right room.
We're gonna walk you through it,
show you just how easy that is to do.
Next up, popovers,
a brand new standard user
interface element on Lion.
Very handy, couldn't be easier to use.
From there,
we'll continue our tour of the new Aqua,
talk about some of the changes to the
way standard controls are rendered,
different rendering effects that
are applied to controls in Lion,
things that differ from previous
system versions that you might want
to adapt to in your own UI design
work and custom control work.
And last but not least,
we've made some subtle but important
improvements in our resolution
independence architecture for Lyon.
The new model extends farther
down the stack all the way to
the window and screen level.
It is much more comprehensive.
We believe it is better suited to
carry us all into the future together.
So that's a lot of ground to cover.
Let's start by diving right in and
immersing ourselves in Full Screen mode.
As you saw in the keynote,
Full Screen mode in Lion is
not a per app state,
but it is a per window state.
You can take windows that are
capable of being taken full
screen into Full Screen mode.
The system moves that window
into its own new dedicated space.
Clutter gets out of the way.
You're focused in on your content,
but when you need your toolbar,
your menu bars, they're available.
You just flick the mouse
to the top of the screen.
I have all of my menu
commands available to me.
I can choose the magnifier tool.
The menu bar gets out of the way.
I'm back to focusing on my content.
Now if I use a gesture
to swipe to the right,
I'm back to my desktop.
I leave that window in Full Screen mode.
I can take another window Full Screen,
and that window gets its
own Full Screen space.
If I swipe left, I see my Lion is still
in Full Screen space.
If I swipe to the right twice,
I'm back to my desktop.
I can always run home to
Mission Control to get a top-level
overview of all my spaces.
Full Screen and not,
I can navigate among them at a
click or a tap of the trackpad.
We believe this degree of system-level
integration for Full Screen functionality
is going to be a big boon to users.
It will enable this kind of
Full Screen mode of operation
to be accessible to more people
than ever before and provide
interoperability among apps.
So we're very excited about it.
typically look for in full screen
capabilities in an application.
Well,
there are different things that different
users look for in different apps,
but it all boils down to a
combination of two things,
typically.
And the first of those is in the
distraction-prone world that we live in,
the opportunity to sneak off to
a little secluded private office
where there are no distractions,
clutter is out of the way,
and you can focus in on a single task.
I want to write my great screenplay.
I want to do my digital painting.
Whatever it is I want to do,
I don't want to be distracted by shiny
things popping up in my Twitter feed.
I don't want to have my email
on Red Count weighing on my
conscience the whole time.
I don't want to see that stuff.
I want to get off to a
full-screen space and focus on
just what I want to do right now.
Full Screen mode enables you to do that,
of course.
And in hand with that goes
the desire to make the most of
available screen real estate,
to maximize the use of what you've got.
This is useful even on a
30-inch cinema display,
but users who have an
ultra-compact portable,
for example, the 11-inch MacBook Air,
will especially love you for giving
them a mode where they can operate,
where they can see as much
of their content as possible,
interact with it with as little
intermediary UI as possible.
and it gives them a way to really
use that screen space to its fullest.
These user benefits taken together are
so compelling that of course a lot of
apps have gone ahead and implemented
their own notion of full screen mode.
So what are the benefits to
our making this an integrated
system feature and your adopting
our notion of full screen mode?
Well, there are a couple of
things that it lets us do.
First and foremost,
it lets us present a per window
model for full screen mode,
where this is the state
of an individual window.
So you can have some of your
windows in full screen mode,
some not,
and different windows across different
applications in full screen mode or not,
and something that users can
manage on a per window basis.
This would be something that would be
a lot of work for individual developers
to do in their own applications.
And even if you did all of that work,
you wouldn't have the kind of cross
app coexistence and integration that
we can provide at the system level.
In addition, as with so many other
things on the Macintosh,
there's the opportunity for us to provide
a consistent and uniform user experience.
This enables users to learn a
feature once in one application
and leverage that knowledge,
apply it to every application
that supports that feature.
So with Full Screen mode,
the relevant things are the
ability to recognize which
windows can be taken full screen,
standard user interface elements
so that the user knows how
to take a window full screen,
how to get out of full screen,
how to navigate, as I said, using spaces,
using mission control,
using gestures in and out of those
full screen spaces so they feel
like they're always in control
and they know where things are.
So here we have a simple window.
This is an Xcode window.
And all you have to do is look in the
upper right corner of the window and
see that Enter Full Screen widget.
That tells you that that window is
capable of being taken full screen.
I can click on that widget.
My window gets taken into a new
space that's created just for
it to be in full screen mode.
And if I mouse up to get
my menu bar to come down,
I can see in the upper right
corner of the menu bar,
that's my escape hatch.
I always have that exit full
screen widget available to me,
so I know I can get out that way.
And again,
I know I can navigate using gestures,
spaces, and mission control.
So how do you enable this
capability in your applications?
Well, there really is.
With so many things with Cocoa,
we try to make the simple things simple.
The basics really are very simple.
There is one fundamental
thing you need to do,
and that's simply to tell AppKit which
of your windows should be capable
of being taken full screen.
Typically,
in a document-based application,
these are your document windows.
Or if you have a single
window application,
it's your one main window.
Just tell us which of your windows
should have this capability.
In addition,
it's nice for you to provide an
Enter Full Screen menu item for
users who like to discover or
find functionality through menus.
And that item is best placed in the
View menu if your application has one.
If you don't, the Window menu is a
good fallback for that.
And that really is all that
you fundamentally need to do.
Of course, there's always the opportunity
to apply more polish,
and there are some things you can do
to make your apps really stand out.
One of the things you can do
is have your Windows toolbar,
if your window has a toolbar,
automatically hidden and shown with
the menu bar in the full screen space.
That's real easy to do.
I'll show you how.
Another thing you might want to consider
doing is providing a custom size
for your Windows Full Screen frame.
By default,
the system will assume that you
want to use the entire main screen,
which may be appropriate for some
apps if I have my month view in iCal.
I probably just want to stretch that
up so that the boxes are as big as
possible and I can see as much of the
detail in each of them as possible.
But sometimes you want
a different frame size.
We'll see that's not all as
appropriate as in our demo app,
and you can customize that easily.
While you're doing that,
another thing you might want to consider
doing is modifying or streamlining your
Windows content for Full Screen mode.
If you think one of the things
that your users are looking for
is a more streamlined UI that
gets clutter out of the way,
that gets distractions out of the way,
and provides them only with what
they need to operate in that mode,
this might be a good time to consider
altering your Windows layout,
maybe temporarily removing some
views or having things that
auto-hide or just take less space.
And if you find yourself making
extensive customizations of that nature,
you may find it useful for your
bookkeeping purposes to just
create an entirely separate window
for use in Full Screen mode.
That window will reference
the same content to the user.
The illusion is that their
original window was just morphed
into this Full Screen window,
but for your purposes,
you can keep a separate window for that,
and we give you the hooks to
substitute a different window of
your choosing when under Full Screen.
Lastly,
the system provides a standard crossfade
transition for taking the window
into or out of Full Screen mode,
but you have the ability
to fully customize that,
and we'll look at doing that in our demo,
too.
But, you know,
there are five bullet points of
customization potential there,
but really it all boils
down to the basics.
telling us which windows
can be made full screen.
You can do this with zero lines of
code in Xcode's Interface Builder mode.
This is part of a window's
collection behaviors,
as usually pertains to spaces and so on.
There's a new full screen item.
Just change that from Unsupported to
Primary Window for your window class,
for your window template in IB,
and you're good to go.
If you really like writing code,
of course,
there's a corresponding bit for this
in your window's collection behaviors.
You can set it using
Set Collection Behavior.
and Dan Schimpf.
And again, adding that menu item
is a nice thing to do.
Couldn't be easier because there's a
template for this in Interface Builder.
You just drag out the
Full Screen menu item,
drop it in your View menu
or your Window menu.
It's already wired up to send the
toggle Full Screen message to your
application's first responder,
so any window in the responder
chain will pick that up,
validate against it if
it can go Full Screen,
and respond to that message to toggle
the window into or out of Full Screen.
The menu item updates to say exit
Full Screen when you're in Full Screen,
and usually actually it has
the recommended key equivalent
of Command Control F wired
up for it already.
And to show you just
how easy this is to do,
we're going to take Sketch,
which is one of our standard
document-based application examples,
and convert it to be a
Full Screen capable app on Lion.
So I'm going to open up
the Sketch project here.
And this is Sketch just built as is.
So by default,
the system doesn't assume that
it can be taken full screen.
We can maximize the window
using the Zoom button here,
but that doesn't give us the same effect.
We still have the menu bar in the way.
We still have the dock,
and we're really just covering
up other windows on the desktop.
So this isn't really full
screen mode by any stretch.
So let's open up the Sketch project.
And again,
the basics of what you need to do,
just tell us which windows
should be capable of this.
That's the first thing you need to do.
So we're going to go into the
DrawWindowNib file that holds
Sketch's document window.
And if I go in the
Properties Inspector here,
here you see the windows collection
behaviors in these pop-ups.
I'll just change Full Screen to
Primary Screen and Save.
And we could be good to go now,
but let's add that menu
item while we're at it.
I'll go to the Windows menu,
since we don't have View menu.
I'm going to type in
Full Screen in the search here,
and we want to be in the Object Library.
There we go.
Boom, drop it right in.
And if I inspect this item,
I can see it's wired up to send toggle
Full Screen to the first responder.
So great, we're good to go.
Let's just try and build
and run just like this.
All right, now we've got our
Enter Full Screen widget.
And I can toggle Sketch into
and out of Full Screen mode.
And I've got my menu bar
available when I want it.
I can bring up my inspectors and so on.
I can do my editing.
Everything works.
My dock is down here if I mouse
to the bottom of the screen,
but it's out of the way most of the time.
So we've got basic full
screen support in here.
We're still not using-- we're
not really using the available
screen space very well.
We don't need that much
space to see our document.
We've got all this
gray space on the side.
So let's look at doing
something about that next.
What we want to do here--
is customize the
Windows Full Screen size,
as I said.
All of these kinds of customizations
that you might want to do next
are done in the Windows delegate.
So typically,
that's an NSWindowController.
In Sketch's case,
it's an SKTWindowController.
So we're going to go into
SKTWindowController and scroll
down here to some code that I've
written ahead of time for us.
And disabled.
We'll enable that now.
And the method to override is
windowWillUseFullScreenContentSize.
AppKit passes you the window that
it's planning to take full screen,
the proposed size for that window.
Typically, this is the entire screen.
You have the opportunity to
return whatever size you want,
taking that proposed size into account.
So what we're going to do here is
we're going to assume that we want
to keep the same zoom factor for the
document and pretend that-- imagine
that we have an infinitely large screen.
What would be the ideal size that
we want this window to be so that
the user doesn't have to scroll,
but they can see their entire content?
And so what we'll do is
we'll take the graphic view,
which is the document view in the window,
get its bounds,
convert that up to the scroll view space.
We'll consider that
our ideal content size.
That's how much space we need to show
our content at its current zoom factor.
We'll need to account for the possibility
of the scroll view having a border
and maybe having legacy scrollers,
which take up space.
So we might need to grow
that rectangle a little bit.
That gives us our ideal window size here.
And then we just need to
constrain that to reality,
the proposed size, the actual screen size
that we have to work with.
So we'll take the smaller on
each axis and return that value.
And let's build and run.
And now when we take Sketch Full Screen,
it just slides on over into space.
And we've got this nice linen background
that the system provides for us.
So we've got room to arrange our
inspectors and other things around it,
which is nice.
And if I exit Full Screen mode,
and Mike Schuch there.
Okay, now we're in Full Screen mode.
Exit.
and we're back.
But the transition isn't
exactly what we would want.
And especially we can see this if
we kind of try to exercise this a
little in a more challenging way.
Let's zoom in and suppose that we're
only seeing part of the document.
We want to enter Full Screen mode.
That's not really a great transition,
I think.
We would sort of expect that the
existing content that we can see would
just sort of slide on over into space,
because we're not
changing the zoom factor,
and we would just reveal
the other content.
So maybe here the crossfade
isn't really a good idea,
and we want to implement
our own custom transition.
I will show you the hooks
that you need to do that.
So there are six methods for this,
three for entering Full Screen and
a parallel set of three methods
for exiting Full Screen mode.
Four of those methods are
really trivial to implement,
so really we've just got two
major methods to worry about.
These are also methods
on the Windows delegate.
The first thing you need to do to
tell AppKit that you want to provide
a custom enter Full Screen transition
is override custom windows to
enter Full Screen for window.
You're given the window that
AppKit means to take Full Screen,
and you're expected to return
an array of windows to be
used in that Full Screen mode.
Now why an array of windows?
Well, you might want to specify
additional windows for any
temporary animation effects that you
want to create in Full Screen mode.
What you're returning is the set
of windows that are tagged as
belonging to the Full Screen space
that's being created.
So any windows that you want to have
appear in that Full Screen space
and during the transition
should be included in this list.
In this case,
we're just including our original window.
If we wanted to substitute an alternative
window for Full Screen mode that's
just dedicated to Full Screen mode,
we could specify that instead.
Right now, we're just going to use the
window that we were given,
but overriding this
method tells AppKit that,
well,
we want subsequent methods to be invoked.
We're doing a custom transition.
The real method to think about is
Windows start custom animation to
enter Full Screen with duration.
You're passed in the duration in seconds
of the transition that the system
is going to use for everything else,
including the menu bar,
sliding spaces over.
So you want to use the
same duration in seconds,
but it's up to you to set the duration
of your animation to match that.
And the first thing I'm going
to do is stash off to the side
what our Windows frame was before
we went into Full Screen mode,
because when we exit,
it'd be nice if we just know
which frame to restore back to.
We're going to persist this along with
the Windows other persistent state,
because the fact that a window
is in Full Screen is a part of
the Windows persistent state.
If the user takes a Sketch window
Full Screen and then quits
Sketch and relaunches Sketch,
not only will that document be reopened,
but it will be reopened in
its own Full Screen space.
So that state persists.
We should persist the
previous frame along with it.
Next thing I'm going to do,
I'm going to bump the window up
above the menu bar level so that the
window during--while it's in flight,
it can fly over the menu bar
instead of appearing on the screen.
So that's the first step.
The second step is to set the window
up above the menu bar level so that the
window during--while it's in flight,
it can fly over the menu bar
instead of appearing on the screen.
So that's the first step.
The second step is to set the window
up above the menu bar level so that the
window during--while it's in flight,
it can fly over the menu bar
instead of appearing on the screen.
That just makes things
look a little nicer.
And the next thing I'm going to do
here is set the Full Screen window
mask bit in the Windows style mask.
And this fundamentally is the thing that
marks the window as being in Full Screen.
It also has the side effect of
hiding the Windows title bar.
Now, AppKit would do this
automatically for us,
but I want to do it at the start of
the animation so that I can start
with just the remaining content
right to the window and smoothly
interpolate that to my new target frame.
Next thing we want to do is figure out
how much space we have to work with.
On a multi-display system,
it's always the main screen,
the screen with the menu bar.
That's where windows are going to be
put when they're taken full screen.
All the other displays are available for
inspectors and other auxiliary windows.
So we're going to get
the size of that screen,
and now we want to figure
out what window size we want.
Well, we've already written a
delegate method for that,
so we'll just invoke it right here.
Use the code we've already written.
We'll center that
rectangle on the screen,
and now we just want to animate
to that new proposed frame.
And I'm going to use a new,
minor new bit of API enhancement in Lion.
Run animation group completion handler.
This is a convenient way to
wrap a set of animated actions
in a begin and end grouping.
And at the same time,
specify a completion handler that will be
executed after your animation completes.
And it's kind of nice syntax that that
completion handler is specified later.
This is the order that things happen in.
So you specify the duration.
We animate to the new frame
using the windows animator.
And then when we're done,
we're going to clean up by restoring
the windows previous window level.
Last but not least,
there's a method that gets invoked if
the system tries to take your window
full screen but can't for some reason.
This can happen for reasons
beyond your control.
Something else happens in the system
state that you have no control over.
For example,
if somebody tries to take your
window full screen and then
immediately switches to dashboard,
that would cause this
kind of thing to happen.
So you have any cleanup you need to do,
such as temporary animated
windows or other resources.
This would be where you do that cleanup
if you fail to enter full screen.
We have nothing to do here.
So I've left that empty.
Now, for exiting full screen,
it's pretty much the parallel thing.
Three methods.
You specify which windows
you want us to use.
Then there's the method that's invoked
to tell you to start your animation.
And this is much simpler
than the Enter case,
because I've saved the
frame I want to restore to.
So I'm just going to go through.
Set my windows level to be
above the main menu bar so
that we can fly right over it.
I'm going to set the style
mask at the beginning again.
In this case,
I'm clearing the full screen window
mask bit so that we can put the title
bar back right at the beginning and
slide the window continuously from
that rectangle to its new rectangle.
And we've saved the frame
we want to restore to,
so we just animate to that.
And then when we're done,
we'll restore the window's
previous window level.
There's one other trick in
here worth pointing out.
Normally, a titled window,
when you try to set its frame,
it constrains itself to the screen.
And in particular,
the system prevents you from moving
that top edge of the window above
the bottom edge of the menu bar
or the top edge of the screen.
We want to be able to defy those limits
during the course of an animation
because when we're exiting full screen,
first thing we're going to do is
pop that title bar back to visible,
but it's off screen,
and the system's going to
try and push it back down.
So we want to temporarily suspend that,
and I've done that with a
simple window subclass here.
I've added SKT window.
That has a Boolean property we can
use to simply suspend that behavior
and stop constraining to screen.
And to make that work,
I'll need to make sure I go
into my nib and set the
window's subclass to SKT window.
Save, and Build and Run.
And now we have our sketch again.
Take it full screen.
OK, that worked,
but that was the easy case before.
Let's exit.
Now let's zoom in and scroll around.
Take it full screen.
And there we go.
We have a much smoother,
more continuous transition.
So it's a little more pleasing,
puts a little more polish in the app.
You can do really any kind of arbitrary
effect you can implement here.
The hooks are very general.
We give you the way to do whatever
kind of animation you want to do.
So one of the things that we
saw there is that there's this
Full Screen Window Mask that gets--
it's a bit that gets set on the window.
When it's taken full screen,
that removes the title bar.
This is the thing to check if you have
an NSWindow pointer and you want to say,
hey, is this window in full screen mode?
That's what you check for.
You might also want to ask,
is the system currently showing a full
screen space for any of my windows?
And the way to do that is look
in the application's presentation
options for this full screen flag.
That'll answer that question.
Lastly, auto hiding the toolbar--
really easy to do.
There's an Auto Hide Toolbar
presentation option,
and your chance to
provide this bit is in the
Window Will Use Full Screen Presentation
Options delegate method.
Just override this or that bit in with
whatever options AppKit is proposing to
use for taking your window full screen.
And there you go.
Your toolbar will auto hide.
Lastly, we provide the full complement
of Full Screen Will Enter,
Did Enter, Will Exit,
Did Exit notifications
that you might expect,
so that any part of your application
can subscribe to these notifications
and find out when your application is
transitioning into or out of full screen
mode and windows are changing state.
And there are convenient window
delegate method equivalents for that.
And really, that's it about full screen,
but there's a lot more to know
about the new Aqua in Lion,
including popovers.
And to tell you all about that,
I'm going to hand you over
to my capable colleague,
Dan Schimpf.
Thank you.
Hi, my name is Dan Schimpf.
I'm a framework engineer on
the application framework.
And first thing I'm going to talk
to you today is about popovers.
Now, popovers are something we've seen in
the system for a couple of releases now.
There's a couple of examples here.
Now,
the popovers you've seen on the Mac so
far have been custom implementations.
Each application you've seen
has had to do this themselves.
Now, there's a standard control on the
iPad called UI Popover Controller.
In Lion now, we have popovers.
So what is a popover?
A popover, well, loosely defined,
it's a small chunk of user
interface that's on the screen.
And it's actually strongly relevant
to a specific spot on screen.
You click a button, it shows up,
and there's actually an arrow pointing
to the point where it came from.
So it's very contextual.
It's a good place to have very
contextual information that
the user can see right then,
because it animates.
So the NS Popover is a new class
in line to allow you to do this
in a standard way in your class.
And again, loosely defined,
it hosts any content view
relative to another view
that's already on the screen.
So creating popovers is easy.
A popover has an NSViewController inside.
And if you haven't used
NSViewController before,
it's a new class that was
in a few releases ago.
And an NSViewController, well,
it controls a view.
And it's a generic class.
A view is usually meant to subclass.
And it just encapsulates the logic
for controlling that view and
whatever that view needs to do.
And to help you out,
it can actually load a nib very easily,
or you can programmatically
create the view.
And it's just a great encapsulation for
dealing with views and modular views
and all their lib-noding semantics.
And it's a great class.
So we've used it here to take
advantage of all those great things.
And it's actually great because
you're going to want to use a new view
controller for each popover that you use.
So it's a great way to
use this encapsulation.
And you don't have to reuse any state.
So please just use a new view
controller for every popover.
pop over, and that'll allow you to--
and Dan Schimpf.
Keep things fresh as you go along.
So the popover appearances,
actually two popover appearances
that are built into the kit.
There's the minimal one that
you see on the screen here.
That's sort of the default one
you'll see most often probably.
And then there's also a HUD variant that
matches the HUD variant for Windows.
Showing popovers,
there's one method to do this.
Show relative to rect
of view preferred edge.
Again, remember, popovers are relative
to a view on screen.
So that's the view you pass in.
That's the view that you
want the arrow to point to.
And then you pass a
rectangle inside that view,
and that's in the coordinate
space of the view.
And that's just an area of that
view that we'll use to point to.
So if you just have a regular
button and you just want it
to come from that button,
you can pass the button's bounds in,
and it'll just use the button itself.
But if you have a larger view,
let's say like the iCal,
and the last argument is a hint to us
to say where should the arrow come from?
The top, bottom, left or right?
Now, the popovers can also move.
If you have an area inside of
a view and that area moves,
the popover can move to match it.
Now,
if it moves in a way that we can detect,
say, for scrolling or the
window moving itself,
we will automatically figure that
out and move the popover for you.
As you can see here,
so the view is scrolling up,
and the popover is moving automatically.
You don't have to do anything for this.
This happens automatically.
But if it happens in a
way that we can't predict,
let's say back in the iCal Week view,
if the user moves that
event to another place,
well, we don't know that.
So you have to use Set Positioning
Rect to update the original
rectangle that you gave us,
and the app will move the
popover to the new spot.
Popovers also come with
animations on by default.
It animates on screen and
animates the movement,
as you saw in the last slide.
So this, again, this is on by default.
And that's what it looks like.
So you only want to turn it off
if you have something to do that
you don't want the user to see.
So if you want to show the popover
before the window even comes on screen,
you can turn off animations,
put the popover up,
then you should turn them back on.
So if you have to need to dismiss them,
the user can get the right animation.
Dismissing popovers, by default,
you get the application
defined behaviors.
What that means is it acts like a
window that you're probably used to.
You are responsible for
closing it in the default case.
There's a close method,
or you can hook up a button to it.
But there are also two other kinds
of behaviors that we think will
solve the problem of most popovers.
And you should check them out
and see if you can use them.
Transient means that any click outside
of the popover will dismiss the popover.
That's probably what you're used to.
Any click outside of there,
the popover will go away,
and it'll animate.
Semi-transient is a little more sticky.
There are some events
that it will let through,
and it won't dismiss the popover.
That's great for if you want to be
able to switch to another application
or another window and be able to
refer to the contents of that popover.
[Transcript missing]
The one last nice thing that
Popover can do for you is detaching.
So if your application allows it,
the user can drag the Popover,
and it will create a standalone window
with the Popover's contents in it,
which is great for inspectors.
They want to have an inspector here,
and I want to drag it out and
keep that inspector around.
And so there's one call for that.
The Popover delegate has to implement
detachable window for Popover.
And what that is,
you will hand us a window with the
Popover with a window for that Popover.
And so you should create a new
instance of your ViewController
to populate the window,
because you may need to configure it a
little bit differently to stick around.
So you hand us the window.
Don't put it on screen.
We'll put it on screen at the time
that the user has done dragging it,
or at the right time.
So now I'm going to do a quick demo of
how to put a popover in an application.
OK.
So we're actually going
to start from new project.
Call it popover.
So in my main menu,
I just have a standard window.
Let's get up.
And so what I'm going to do is
I'm going to drag out a button.
And we'll call this the Info button.
And this is just going to show
my fake little inspector here.
The next thing I'm going to
do is search for popovers,
and you'll see if I can spell popover.
When I drag this out into
my top level objects,
they actually create two objects.
So we create the popover and
the popover view controller.
So this already comes
configured out of the box,
set up.
So the popover-- and you can see that
the popover's connections-- I can
just select one of them-- it's already
hooked up to the right view controller.
And so now, I'm just going to do
everything in this nib.
You'll probably find it
easier with View Controller to
do it in a separate nib.
But just for the purpose of this demo,
I'm going to drag out a
view for the popover itself.
View up.
And so now this is going to be the
view that the popover is going to show.
So we can see it, let's just toss some
radio buttons in there.
OK, now I need to write a little bit
of code so I can show the popover.
For that, up comes--
So this is my application delegate.
This is the class that's
gonna be controlling this.
I'm gonna add an outlet for the popover,
and then we're gonna add one
action to show the popover.
And this is really, really simple.
As you can see,
it just shows show relative to rect.
And we're going to use the
bounds of the button again.
Just make sure to pop that.
We're going to use the
bottom of the button,
and we're going to put the arrow on top.
Okay, now I need to make sure to
remember to hook these up.
We're gonna,
now I've hooked up the action.
and I will hook up the outlet.
Now,
if I remembered all my steps correctly,
all of this is necessary
to show a popover.
Now, by default,
this is in the application
defined behavior,
so I can't -- if I'm
clicking around here,
the popover stays up.
So let's look at some
of the other behaviors.
I'll go back to my inspector
here and change it to transient.
Now, build and run.
Now, if I just simply click out,
the popover closes automatically,
and I can bring back
more of them as I needed.
So you should experiment
with the other behaviors,
see if they work for you.
Certainly the users will
expect this standard behavior.
and Dan Schimpf.
So when do you use popovers?
Popovers are great for
inline inspectors like that,
although that's not a great example.
They're great for little spots
on screen where you can show
the properties of an object.
It's great for a single metadata of UI,
let's say name or something like that.
You know,
especially when something doesn't have
enough space to fit in the main window,
you can just show a little bit
of extra content in a popover.
[Transcript missing]
Inside the popover,
you'll see that there's a
border all the way around it.
There's a white content,
so you're not going to want
to put a border around the
content inside of the popover.
If you've got a scroll view or something,
don't put a border around the content.
Let it go all the way to the edge.
Again, keep it simple.
One or two things inside are great,
especially for smaller
popovers like that.
You could have a larger popover,
like say instruments,
and that would make more sense too.
And don't put a close button in
there unless you absolutely need it.
If you have a transient popover,
you don't really need a close button.
But if you have an
application-defined popover,
you can put a close button in
there and wire it up so the
user will know how to get out.
One last tip to give you,
popovers and toolbars.
Popovers, if you remember,
require a rectangle and a view to show.
NS Toolbar and the
action method for that,
you have neither of those.
The solution here is to use a custom
toolbar item with an NS button inside
that looks like a toolbar item,
and then you get a button with a
view and you can get a rectangle,
and so you can show a popover from that.
If you want to show a
popover from a toolbar item,
that's the solution to do.
So that's popovers.
Now I want to talk a little bit about the
changes you've no doubt noticed in Lion.
So Aqua, what is Aqua?
Aqua is the look and feel of Mac OS X.
It covers both the appearance and the
behavior of the user interface controls.
You've probably heard this in
a couple of different talks,
like the term Aqua.
And if you've been
around to the platform,
and a while, you'll remember what
Aqua used to look like.
It used to evoke more Aquaness.
There used to be more blue,
there's more pills.
There was a lot more Aqua-y things.
and Dan Schimpf.
But here we are now in 10.7,
and things are a little bit different.
They're more gray, they're more subtle,
they're a lot flatter,
there's more soft features.
And Aqua is no different.
There are more changes in line.
What we've done is we've
refreshed many of the controls.
So some things that have been
around for several releases now
without any changes are different.
If you're a developer,
you'll notice that some controls
have more transparency than before.
Now,
the user won't necessarily notice this,
but if you're trying
to use custom controls,
you probably will if you haven't already.
And there's more context-specific
appearances these controls can get into.
And what I mean by that is that,
on the big matrix of states
that a button can get into,
more of those spots have a specific,
unique appearance.
So inactive, pressed,
all these things have more specific,
unique appearances that you may
need to be aware of when you're
implementing a custom control,
just so it matches the built-in ones.
Again, these changes were meant to
focus the user attention on
the active window content.
So background windows fade out.
They get a lot lighter and more subtle.
And even the surrounding
content of your active window,
like the toolbar and your sidebar things,
a lot of the color was taken out of
that to focus on the active window,
the content of your active window,
so where you're actually doing your work.
And so everything else
is not as distracting.
Textured controls.
I mentioned that some controls
have more transparency,
and this is where you'll probably see it.
So some controls have
so-called textured appearances,
buttons and such.
And these were intended for
use on a textured background.
Textured used to mean metal,
if you remember back in the day,
when textured windows
were first introduced.
You might say, well,
that's a funny way to say metal,
because they look metal.
But what we really meant
is that these controls,
the textured controls are meant to
be used on a textured background,
and they just happen to
be metal at the time.
So now they happen to be transparent,
because that's what shows the background
of the new textured windows the best.
So if you're using, let's say,
a round textured button in sort of a
background where you're going to see a
big bright color or something other than,
again, the window background,
you may get something like this now.
And that's probably not
what you want to be seeing.
Because again,
these buttons are best for use
in the toolbar or against any
sort of other window Chrome.
And that's where they look better.
They don't actually look
transparent in that case.
So you might want to use a
different kind of button instead.
Maybe the round back button works
great in table views and those places
like that where you may be using them.
Inactive controls, another area where we
see a lot of change.
So again, many controls now have unique
appearances for their inactive states
that you may not have seen before.
And so if you have a custom control,
you probably want to match this.
And a good way to know if your window is
inactive is just to check if it's key,
because that also works for if the
application itself is inactive.
But it's important to know that
although the buttons look different,
they're still usable in the background.
There's not an actual
usability change here.
This is just an appearance change.
So buttons are still-- if the
buttons could be used on first click,
that is still the case now.
That hasn't changed.
So it's just an appearance change.
So how do we indicate that a button
can be used in the background?
Well, we're using rollovers a
lot in toolbars for this.
You'll see this is a
movie of the mail toolbar.
And you can see when you're rolling
over the toolbar items that the
button glyph itself highlights.
and the best thing about this session is
that it's a little bit more intuitive.
The bezel itself is only
indicating the window state.
And the glyph itself is
indicating the button state.
And again, this is just so
You have to be careful with rollovers
because you don't want users to
be rolling their mouse across the
screen and seeing just a ton of
stuff changing in their mouse,
just like a carnival,
like a sparkly mouse.
Unless you want a sparkly mouse,
but not all users want sparkly mice.
So rollovers, again,
just indicate when the mouse is overhead,
and it gives a soft,
subtle effect to say, hey,
if you click here,
something's going to happen.
And so if you've got a custom control,
the best way to do this
is with NSTrackingArea.
It was introduced a couple releases ago,
and it's a great way to
find out in simple mouse
entering or exiting messages.
So on that last screen,
you saw the glyph highlight.
Well, did we have two different
images for that?
Well, no.
Actually, we just had one image.
It's called an image template.
And AppKit is processing the
image into different states.
for-- that's appropriate for the context.
So this is the image template for,
let's say, a lock icon.
And so you can see it's
just a black image.
And App can see-- App replaces the
black areas or other areas like
that just with a softer color,
or you'll see there's more
effects that we can do with that.
And if you're already using this because
this is not something that's new,
if you're already using these,
you get updated to the
new effects automatically.
So how do you make your image template?
Well, grayscale images are best.
And PDS,
we recommend PDS for scaling purposes.
So you get high resolution-- you
get high DPI support for free with
PDS because they'll scale infinitely.
So when you're designing your image,
if you say you have a color icon and you
want to make an image template out of it,
think about the shadow it
would cast and use that.
You don't want to just invert it.
You want to just drain
all the color out of it,
but think about how it would look.
Especially, look how-- because sometimes,
we'll need to invert that icon,
make it all white on certain backgrounds.
Let's say,
after something's been selected,
it'll be all white.
So think about the different
states it's going to be in,
and try it out.
And also consider, new in line,
the user can select different
source list styles or icon sizes.
So if you've got an icon,
make sure you know how it scales.
So to set these templates,
the best way to set the templates,
if you're loading it from a file,
the file has template at the end of it.
So let's say like lock
template dot tiff or dot PDF.
We'll notice that,
and it'll automatically
mark it as a template.
The other way you can do it if
you already have something loaded
is call image set template,
and that will mark it as a template.
So drawing templates, again,
we need more context about your situation
versus just regular image drawing.
So button cell and image
cell give us this context,
because button cell knows
if it's being pressed,
that sort of thing.
And you give it a view that
we can tell whether or not
the window is active or not.
So use button cell for
interactive elements,
buttons that can be pressed, obviously,
and image cell for static
elements like icons and such.
And remember to set the background
style on the cell before you draw it.
And we'll talk about background
styles more in a second.
So here's just a quick example
of the same image template,
that lock icon,
in a number of different states, active,
inactive.
As you can see, just one image gets you
all of these images,
other images for free.
And you get updated to new
appearances as the system changes.
So background styles.
What are the background styles?
Well, background style is a
hint to us and to you
How your custom content should be drawn.
So it sort of describes the background
that you're drawing your content onto.
And then you can take appropriate
steps to change what you need to do.
And this includes
drawing images and text.
And again, if you're using them already,
existing clients are
updated automatically.
So here's a couple of-- there's four
different background styles-- raised,
lowered, light, and dark.
And here's some example context
in which they can be used,
but this is not exhaustive.
It, again, is meant to be more general.
So it just happens to be that raised
happens to be appropriate here.
So raised means my glyph is--
the background is raised relative
to the glyph that it's drawing.
So you get sort of an engraved effect.
[Transcript missing]
So in GraveText, new in Lion,
you can do the same thing for text now.
And if you're using a text field or text
field cell to draw your control text,
you get the new behavior,
the new look for text
in an inactive window,
for example.
And again, if you're using text
field cell to do this,
you get updated automatically.
But you may need to be aware of-- you
may want to be able to redraw your view
when the window goes inactive so the
view can update and draw the correct
appearance when the window goes inactive.
So again, here's just an example
of some engraved text.
That's an example on
Snow Leopard and Lion.
It may be a little bit hard to pick out,
but there's actually a gradient
in the background of that text.
So I'm going to do a quick demo here.
I'm going to open this application,
which it's a bad example of a
Snow Leopard error application.
We've got a sidebar here.
We've got a toolbar item.
We've got some status text down here.
Now, your applications look
a lot better than this,
trust me.
But this will just be an example
of how we can make it better.
So let's look at this
status text down here,
and I'll see if we can make that better.
We're going to update to use
the new engraved text in Lion.
So we're going to replace this indicator
string and image with cell drawing.
So I'm going to take out the points.
I'm going to initialize it
and replace that with cells.
And notice that I'm setting the
background style here to raised to match
the context in which it's being drawn.
and I'm going to change the drawing code.
This will actually get shorter
because the cells will do a lot
of the work that I'm doing here.
So now you can see that we've
got the template drawing
for the image and the text.
Let's see if we can-- we cannot.
We cannot zoom up on that.
But there's the correct template
drawing on the text as well.
Now I notice if I click over here, well,
we've got these round textured buttons,
and this could be better.
So let's look at the cell.
I'm going to switch this, the icon,
the image drawing on the left
over to be an image cell.
I'll jump down here.
It's being drawn.
This is a regular NS image.
Let me grab an image cell.
So now I've got an image cell.
I'm setting the background
style to whatever my style is,
because this is an NSCell subclass.
So the table view is going to set the
appropriate background style on me,
and then I can pass that along
to the cells that I'm drawing.
So now we build.
We see that when I click on--
and Awesome.
Oh, you know what I forgot?
Cell copy.
Always remember to update
your copy with zone for NSLs.
OK, now when I click on it,
you'll see that the icon inverts to
indicate that the row has been selected,
and it's a better appearance
against the darker background.
But I've still got this
round textured button.
So let's go back and just change
it to a round rect button.
Textured Rounded to Round Direct.
And now I've got a button
that doesn't become unreadable
when the user selects it.
So one last thing,
I'm going to look at this.
This is a toolbar item with
just a regular image in it.
But what I can do-- let's go here.
Let's look at this.
I actually have a template
version of this icon.
In IB, it goes all black,
but when I run it,
now we get the nice engraved
appearance for the toolbar that
also works when I go inactive.
So just a few simple things that
you can do to your application
to make it fit in better with
the standard controls on Lion.
Okay, that's all from me.
Now I'm going to turn it over to
my colleague Patrick to talk about
resolution independence on Lion.
Good morning.
My name is Patrick Heynen,
and I'm here to talk about the pixel.
So, over the last decade,
LCD display technology has become
quite pervasive and is the predominant
way in which computer graphic
content is presented to users.
Along the way,
because of the way it's manufactured,
Moore's Law has enabled us to make
it just as easy to pack a whole
bunch more pixels onto the same
piece of glass as less pixels.
So, there's general agreement
that in the course of time,
the future of the pixel is small.
Now, this, of course,
presents tremendous challenges
for software compatibility,
because if we were to
just proceed as usual,
we would end up with really tiny user
interface elements that our eyes,
which are not conforming to Moore's Law,
would not be able to
really perceive very well.
So, what do we do?
Well, our colleagues over in
iOS have had too much fun,
and we'd like to take some of
that stuff back to the Mac.
So, I'm here to talk about some
exciting updates to our
architecture for resolution
independence for Mac OS X line.
First and foremost,
what we're basically going to do
is take the device-independent
drawing model that we have already,
the Core Graphics API that
you may have seen,
and extend it down to the levels
of the screens themselves.
What this means is that no matter
what the size of the screen
and how many pixels it has,
the sizing of that screen is going
to be now expressed in points,
not pixels.
And the content will
be scaled accordingly.
Now,
one important consequence of this is that
units that used to be measured in pixels,
such as event, window global coordinates,
or window frame coordinates,
event coordinates, mouse coordinates,
are now all going to
be expressed in points,
not pixels,
independent of the characteristics
of the screen that they're on.
So how are we going to
expose this in the system?
Well,
we're introducing the concept of these
new high resolution display modes,
which a display might have.
And you will notice it's described in
a way that the sizing of that display
is now not expressed in pixels,
but it's merely expressed in
a sort of standard point size.
But it may have a higher
resolution backing,
which we indicate currently
with this sort of high DPI tag.
Another, and perhaps the most
significant update we have,
is that we're focusing on
integral scaling per screen.
And these high DPI display modes
are actually configured with a
two to one pixel per point ratio.
which makes the software
compatibility a lot better.
Okay, so what does this mean for
user interface scaling?
Well, the best part about it is that
for most Cocoa applications,
the user interface scaling
is absolutely automatic,
and you don't have to do a thing.
What does this mean?
How does this work?
Well, first and foremost,
Windows automatically gain
high-resolution backing stores,
which results in twice as much pixel
density and twice as much-- well,
twice is kind of four times, I guess,
technically, mathematically-- higher
detail for both regular quartz
drawing and text rendering,
of course, which, of course,
is the killer feature
for high-resolution,
is that super sharp, crisp,
absolutely beautiful text.
And the new Aqua, which my colleague
Dan was describing to you,
has actually been engineered to take
advantage of all available pixels,
should they be present,
and provide a much higher
quality rendering if possible.
So here we go,
and we'll see an example here going
from low resolution 1x to absolutely
beautiful high resolution 2x.
I can look at this all day.
And you'll notice that the template
drawing that my colleague Dan was
describing automatically provides
a higher quality rendering,
much nicer interglows and
shadows and all that stuff,
perfectly automatically for you.
You don't have to do a thing.
Okay,
so what does this really mean for Cocoa?
What does the world look like for
Cocoa applications running in this mode?
Well,
for things that are not court-strong,
like, say, bitmap image resources,
they're automatically interpolated to
the appropriate user presentation size,
which means that they may be fuzzy,
but they will be correct,
which is important.
And view frame coordinates
and layout remain absolutely
consistent with the 1x operation,
so absolutely nothing really changes
from the view of your software when
thinking about the coordinate system,
the user local coordinate system,
and the view coordinate system.
OpenGL frame buffer content is also
kept consistent with 1x operation.
Low resolution content is maintained.
Your OpenGL code sees the
same kind of backing context,
and the resulting content is magnified
automatically to the display at the
appropriate user presentation size.
An important change,
very good and important for
compatibility of existing applications.
Now, we have kept one of our most
popular features of our previous
editions of resolution independence,
which is the magnified mode.
What is magnified mode?
Well, in magnified mode,
window buffers can stay,
get created at low resolution sizes
and don't change from what they would
be on normal low resolution displays,
and the window contents themselves,
after they're drawn,
are scaled to the right
size on the display.
This is an important backstop
for applications that,
due to bugs or bad
assumptions about the display,
are not able to be
created at the right size.
So, the users that are out there
drawing environment are unable
to provide a good user experience
with the default scaling mode,
and so we kick them into
this magnified mode.
The important thing is that this
provides perfect compatibility
for a large class of applications.
Now,
how do you actually optimize and provide
the best possible user experience
for this high-resolution environment?
Well,
the most important thing you can do,
and we recommend you do,
is provide high-resolution
image resources for any static
bitmap content you may have,
and your user interface
or user-facing content.
To facilitate this process,
we're taking a page off the ILS book
and adopting the sort of naming
convention for image resources of
at2x and foo.ping and foo.at2x.ping.
We're going one minor step further
and added a special feature to
Xcode to actually automatically
combine these image resources
into a single multi-page TIFF for
optimal runtime deployment usage,
so we don't have all these files
laying around on disk and so things
are a little more manageable.
In addition,
PDF templates,
as my colleague Dan mentioned,
are a great way to automatically achieve,
you know, rasterization independence,
resolution independence for button icons.
And lastly,
one area that you'll need to focus
on is adapting any OpenGL and
Core Animation code for this
high-resolution environment.
Now, let's talk about OpenGL and
Core Animation for a little bit,
because they're a little bit special.
OpenGL and, to a lesser extent,
Core Animation are inherently
pixel-based technologies and provide
abstractions upon a very thin level of
abstraction upon a raw frame buffer.
So they're really kind of hard to
virtualize in the same way that,
say, the Quartz model is.
Because of this, just like on iOS,
applications are going to need to
request high-resolution backing surfaces,
because typical OpenGL code isn't
going to be surprised if they
suddenly find four times as many
pixels as they're drawing into,
given the nature of the OpenGL APIs.
To do this, we've introduced a new API.
NSU set wants best
resolution OpenGL surface.
Yes.
If you say yes,
on a particular-- you can do
this on a view-by-view basis,
so you can, you know,
you can make the choice
on a per-view basis.
It'll get-- when the
view gets constructed,
when the surface gets constructed,
it'll get constructed
with twice as many pixels,
four times as many pixels.
And your OpenGL viewport and
Model-V transform code can get-- can
need to be modified accordingly to
provide the appropriate rendering.
Custom Core Animation layers,
just like on iOS,
need to have an explicit scale factor.
So, if you're using a layer set
for any custom content that
you might be storing on them,
that these-- that's the
content scale property.
But of course, if you're using
AppKit layer-backed NS views,
we do all this housekeeping
and management for you,
so you don't have to worry about it.
So, we encourage you to use
those when necessary,
and only go to the custom CA layers and
layer scale management if you need to.
OK, so what are some of the problems that
you sometimes do need to-- that exist
that where you might really need to
be aware of the pixels going on in
your-- that you're drawing into and
punch through this virtual world?
Well, there are a couple of key cases.
One is sort of you want to draw
in a nice device-aligned way,
so you don't spill over
the edge of a pixel,
have a nice crisp, sharp line,
or align things perfectly.
And other cases are like you're trying
to allocate an off-screen bitmap context
to draw the contents of a particular
view-- of a user view size into.
In that case, you need to know how many
pixels are back in this.
Well, we provided a set of tools for
you in the form of some APIs,
some old, some new.
The most important which is the-- for
aligning drawing to the device pixel
boundaries is good old Center Scan,
right, which has been around
for decades it seems,
but has been updated to actually
work in this high-resolution backing
environment and device align any
rectangle that you-- from given in
a local view-- So you can see the
coordinates into device alignment.
If you need-- if you're doing a more
complex layout operation and you
need more control over the rounding
operations of-- of the rounding behavior,
we've provided new advanced API in
line for-- for controlling the
individual rounding behavior of each
of the edges of a given rectangle.
This API is, of course,
available in its view and its
window and in a screen because
each of them may have independently
varying back in coordinate spaces.
Now, for coordinate system conversion
like the bitmap context case
I was alluding to before,
we have these coordinate system-- new
coordinate system conversion APIs for
converting RECs from and to backing.
Now, I just say REC here on the slide,
but we have all the
geometric types available.
And these are available again on NSView,
NSWindow,
and NSScreen to handle all those
three different coordinate spaces.
So in the bitmap context case,
if I want-- had a particular view
I wanted to create an off-screen for,
I take that-- the view's bounds,
I'd say convert REC to backing,
get this-- and that would
convert it into pixels.
So in the bitmap context case,
if I want-- had a particular view
I wanted to create an off-screen for,
I take that-- the view's bounds,
I'd say convert REC to backing,
get this-- and that would
convert it into pixels.
I'd say convert REC to backing,
get this-- and that would
convert it into pixel geometry,
get the size from that,
allocate my memory that's
appropriate to that,
create the CG bitmap context,
apply the scale to it, I'm good to go.
So, a few tips and tricks,
realities of living
in this virtual world,
things that are a little bit different.
First and foremost,
be prepared for fractional mouse
locations and view coordinates.
Something that actually aligns
perfectly nicely on a nice pixel
boundary on the screen might actually,
in your code,
end up on a 0.5 boundary now
due to this virtualization.
It's not a bad thing,
not a horrible thing,
just be careful to rid your code
of any assumptions about things
being integral into point space
having anything to do with pixels.
And keep in mind that NSView, NSWindow,
and NSScreen,
especially with this funniness
with the OpenGL surfaces,
can all have independently
varying backing resolutions,
so don't make any assumptions,
and make sure you use the right
coordinate transformation API to do
your work in the right space and make
your decisions in the right space.
Secondly, or, well, fourthly, I guess,
NSImageSize,
because it's an AppKit object,
its size is expressed in points,
but CG images are always
expressed in pixels,
so be careful that you
don't make any mistakes.
And keep in mind that NSView, NSWindow,
and NSScreen,
especially with this funniness with these
layout assumptions based on CG image
geometry in your local view space.
This is a common pitfall.
And lastly, most of the time,
calling center scanner is really
all you really have to do to make
sure things sort of snap into
place in a high-resolution screen.
And with that,
I'd like to hand it over to my
esteemed colleague and... Thank you,
Patrick.
...do a little bit of wrapping.
So this may be the end
of our session today.
Thank you very much.
and David I can see more pixels already.
This may be the end of our
programming here at this talk,
but this is just the beginning
of your adventures on Lion.
You can always email Bill Dudney,
our Application Frameworks Evangelist,
dudney@apple.com.
He will be happy to steer
you in the right direction.
We have fantastic documentation,
chock full of information.
I'd like to point out in particular,
we have brand new resolution independence
guidelines that relate directly
to what Patrick just talked about.
Look for those on developer.apple.com.
Also, the application kit release notes
are written by the app kit engineers
who work on the framework code.
This is knowledge
imparted directly to you,
and it often contains lots of
late-breaking stuff that hasn't
made it into the documentation yet.
I highly recommend you look at
those and scour them for information
about features you're working with.
We have Apple Developer Forms
where you can ask questions.
Some great sessions coming up.
Don't miss these.
Today at 3:15 in this room, scrolling,
swiping and dragging.
Now with more animation.
We have an entire talk on view-based
table views tomorrow morning.
You'll see the fantastic things that
you can do now that you can put views in
table views and do automatic animations.
Thank you very much for coming.
We hope you enjoy the
rest of the conference.